---
title: "Swelling and Mechanical Response of Regular Irreversible Polymer Networks with Different Topological Microstructures"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/3
excerpt: 'Macromolecules 55(19), 8685–8698'
date: 2022-09-30
venue: 'Macromolecules'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.macromol.2c01279'

---
Using self-consistent field theory, we study the effects of topological structures on the swelling behaviors and mechanical response of irreversible polymer networks. The topology of the networks is fixed to be two-dimensional regular square lattice or hexagonal lattice. The swellability and shear modulus are measured, and the stretching-induced phase transitions are characterized. We find that hexagonal network systems exhibit stronger swellability compared to the square network systems, and this determines the smaller shear modulus for hexagonal networks. Anisotropic response is observed during swelling and uniaxial stretching processes for both square networks and hexagonal networks. In particular, for the swelling under weak confinement, the anisotropy is emphasized such that the swellability is more relevant to the confinement style rather than to the specific topological network structure. In contrast, the shear modulus depends always more strongly on the topological network structures, and the anisotropy gradually diminishes with increasing the solvent quality. During the uniaxial stretching, a phase transition to the lamellar morphology is observed, and such a transition is accompanied by a decrease in the shear modulus, which gives a demonstration of the coupling between shear modulus and the system morphology. A fitting of the shear modulus to a function of polymer density and cross-link density as well as the free energy analysis reveal the crucial role for the fluctuations and entropy of cross-links in determining the elastic modulus. Our findings should be helpful understanding the mechanical–microtopology structure and mechanical–mesomorphology phase relations in polymer networks.
